<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXIII: Justice</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-23" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIII</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Justice</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>The day had been an unusually busy one.</p>
			<p>Five and thirty prisoners, arraigned before the bar of the Committee of Public Safety, had been tried in the last eight hours⁠—an average of rather more than four to the hour; twelve minutes and a half in which to send a human creature, full of life and health, to solve the great enigma which lies hidden beyond the waters of the Styx.</p>
			<p>And Citizen-Deputy Foucquier-Tinville, the Public Prosecutor, had surpassed himself. He seemed indefatigable.</p>
			<p>Each of these five and thirty prisoners had been arraigned for treason against the Republic, for conspiracy with her enemies, and all had to have irrefutable proofs of their guilt brought before the Committee of Public Safety. Sometimes a few letters, written to friends abroad, and seized at the frontier; a word of condemnation of the measures of the extremists; and expression of horror at the massacres on the Place de la Révolution, where the guillotine creaked incessantly⁠—these were irrefutable proofs; or else perhaps a couple of pistols, or an old family sword seized in the house of a peaceful citizen, would be brought against a prisoner, as an irrefutable proof of his warlike dispositions against the Republic.</p>
			<p>Oh! it was not difficult!</p>
			<p>Out of five and thirty indictments, Foucquier-Tinville had obtained thirty convictions.</p>
			<p>No wonder his friends declared that he had surpassed himself. It had indeed been a glorious day, and the glow of satisfaction as much as the heat, caused the Public Prosecutors to mop his high, bony cranium before he had adjourned for the much-needed respite for refreshment.</p>
			<p>The day’s work was not yet done.</p>
			<p>The “politicals” had been disposed of, and there had been such an accumulation of them recently that it was difficult to keep pace with the arrests.</p>
			<p>And in the meanwhile the criminal record of the great city had not diminished. Because men butchered one another in the name of Equality, there were none the fewer among the Fraternity of thieves and petty pilferers, of ordinary cutthroats and public wantons.</p>
			<p>And these too had to be dealt with by law. The guillotine was impartial, and fell with equal velocity on the neck of the proud duke and the gutter-born fille de joie, on a descendant of the Bourbons and the wastrel born in a brothel.</p>
			<p>The ministerial decrees favoured the proletariat. A crime against the Republic was indefensible, but one against the individual was dealt with, with all the paraphernalia of an elaborate administration of justice. There were citizen judges and citizen advocates, and the rabble, who crowded in to listen to the trials, acted as honorary jury.</p>
			<p>It was all thoroughly well done. The citizen criminals were given every chance.</p>
			<p>The afternoon of this hot August day, one of the last of glorious Fructidor, had begun to wane, and the shades of evening to slowly creep into the long, bare room where this travesty of justice was being administered.</p>
			<p>The Citizen-President sat at the extreme end of the room, on a rough wooden bench, with a desk in front of him littered with papers.</p>
			<p>Just above him, on the bare, whitewashed wall, the words: “<i xml:lang="fr">La République: une et indivisible</i>,” and below them the device: “<i xml:lang="fr">Liberté, Egalité, Fraternité!</i>”</p>
			<p>To the right and left of the Citizen-President, four clerks were busy making entries in that ponderous ledger, that amazing record of the foulest crimes the world has ever known, the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Bulletin du Tribunal Révolutionnaire</i>.</p>
			<p>At present no one is speaking, and the grating of the clerks’ quill pens against the paper is the only sound which disturbs the silence of the hall.</p>
			<p>In front of the President, on a bench lower than his, sits Citizen Foucquier-Tinville, rested and refreshed, ready to take up his occupation, for as many hours as his country demands it of him.</p>
			<p>On every desk a tallow candle, smoking and spluttering, throws a weird light, and more weird shadows, on the faces of clerks and President, on blank walls and ominous devices.</p>
			<p>In the centre of the room a platform surrounded by an iron railing is ready for the accused. Just in front of it, from the tall, raftered ceiling above, there hangs a small brass lamp, with a green abat-jour.</p>
			<p>Each side of the long, whitewashed walls there are three rows of benches, beautiful old carved oak pews, snatched from Notre Dame and from the Churches of <abbr>St.</abbr> Eustache and <abbr>St.</abbr> Germain l’Auxerrois. Instead of the pious worshippers of medieval times, they now accommodate the lookers-on of the grim spectacle of unfortunates, in their brief halt before the scaffold.</p>
			<p>The front row of these benches is reserved for those citizen-deputies who desire to be present at the debates of the Tribunal Révolutionnaire. It is their privilege, almost their duty, as representatives of the people, to see that the sittings are properly conducted.</p>
			<p>These benches are already well filled. At one end, on the left, Citizen Merlin, Minister of Justice, sits; next to him Citizen-Minister Lebrun; also Citizen Robespierre, still in the height of his ascendancy, and watching the proceedings with those pale, watery eyes of his and that curious, disdainful smile, which have earned for him the nickname of “the sea-green incorruptible.”</p>
			<p>Other well-known faces are there also, dimly outlined in the fast-gathering gloom. But everyone notes Citizen-Deputy Déroulède, the idol of the people, as he sits on the extreme end of a bench on the right, with arms tightly folded across his chest, the light from the hanging lamp falling straight on his dark head and proud, straight brows, with the large, restless, eager eyes.</p>
			<p>Anon the Citizen-President rings a hand-bell, and there is a discordant noise of hoarse laughter and loud curses, some pushing, jolting, and swearing, as the general public is admitted into the hall.</p>
			<p>Heaven save us! What a rabble! Has humanity really such a scum?</p>
			<p>Women with a single ragged kirtle and shift, through the interstices of which the naked, grime-covered flesh shows shamelessly: with bare legs, and feet thrust into heavy sabots, hair dishevelled, and evil, spirit-sodden faces: women without a semblance of womanhood, with shrivelled, barren breasts, and dry, parched lips, that have never known how to kiss. Women without emotion save that of hate, without desire, save for the satisfaction of hunger and thirst, and lust for revenge against their sisters less wretched, less unsexed than themselves. They crowd in, jostling one another, swarming into the front rows of the benches, where they can get a better view of the miserable victims about to be pilloried before them.</p>
			<p>And the men without a semblance of manhood. Bent under the heavy care of their own degradation, dead to pity, to love, to chivalry; dead to all save an inordinate longing for the sight of blood.</p>
			<p>And God help them all! for there were the children too. Children⁠—save the mark!⁠—with pallid, precocious little faces, pinched with the ravages of starvation, gazing with dim, filmy eyes on this world of rapacity and hideousness. Children who have seen death!</p>
			<p>Oh, the horror of it! Not beautiful, peaceful death, a slumber or a dream, a loved parent or fond sister or brother lying all in white amidst a wealth of flowers, but death in its most awesome aspect, violent, lurid, horrible.</p>
			<p>And now they stare around them with eager, greedy eyes, awaiting the amusement of the spectacle; gazing at the President, with his tall Phrygian cap; at the clerks wielding their indefatigable quill pens, writing, writing, writing; at the flickering lights, throwing clouds of sooty smoke, up to the dark ceiling above.</p>
			<p>Then suddenly the eyes of one little mite⁠—a poor, tiny midget not yet in her teens⁠—alight on Paul Déroulède’s face, on the opposite side of the rooms.</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="fr">Tiens!</i> Papa Déroulède!” she says, pointing an attenuated little finger across at him, and turning eagerly to those around her, her eyes dilating in wishful recollection of a happy afternoon spent in Papa Déroulède’s house, with fine white bread to eat in plenty, and great jars of foaming milk.</p>
			<p>He rouses himself from his apathy, and his great earnest eyes lose their look of agonised misery, as he responds to the greeting of the little one.</p>
			<p>For one moment⁠—oh! a mere fraction of a second⁠—the squalid faces, the miserable, starved expressions of the crowd, soften at sight of him. There is a faint murmur among the women, which perhaps God’s recording angel registered as a blessing. Who knows?</p>
			<p>Foucquier-Tinville suppresses a sneer, and the Citizen-President impatiently rings his hand-bell again.</p>
			<p>“Bring forth the accused!” he commands in stentorian tones.</p>
			<p>There is a movement of satisfaction among the crowd, and the angel of God is forced to hide his face again.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
