<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XV: Detected</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-15" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Detected</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>The opening and shutting of the door roused them both from their dreams.</p>
			<p>Anne Mie, pale, trembling, with eyes looking wild and terrified, had glided into the room.</p>
			<p>Déroulède had sprung to his feet. In a moment he had thrust his own happiness into the background at sight of the poor child’s obvious suffering. He went quickly towards her, and would have spoken to her, but she ran past him up to Madame Déroulède, as if she were beside herself with some unexplainable terror.</p>
			<p>“Anne Mie,” he said firmly, “what is it? Have those devils dared⁠—”</p>
			<p>In a moment reality had come rushing back upon him with full force, and bitter reproaches surged up in his heart against himself, for having in this moment of selfish joy forgotten those who looked up to him for help and protection.</p>
			<p>He knew the temper of the brutes who had been set upon his track, knew that low-minded Merlin and his noisome ways, and blamed himself severely for having left Anne Mie and Pétronelle alone with him even for a few moments.</p>
			<p>But Anne Mie quickly reassured him.</p>
			<p>“They have not molested us much,” she said, speaking with a visible effort and enforced calmness. “Pétronelle and I were together, and they made us open all the cupboards and uncover all the dishes. They then asked us many questions.”</p>
			<p>“Questions? Of what kind?” asked Déroulède.</p>
			<p>“About you, Paul,” replied Anne Mie, “and about maman, and also about⁠—about the citizeness, your guest.”</p>
			<p>Déroulède looked at her closely, vaguely wondering at the strange attitude of the child. She was evidently labouring under some strong excitement, and in her thin, brown little hand she was clutching a piece of paper.</p>
			<p>“Anne Mie! Child,” he said very gently, “you seem quite upset⁠—as if something terrible had happened. What is that paper you are holding, my dear?”</p>
			<p>Anne Mie gazed down upon it. She was obviously making frantic efforts to maintain her self-possession.</p>
			<p>Juliette at first sight of Anne Mie seemed literally to have been turned to stone. She sat upright, rigid as a statue, her eyes fixed upon the poor, crippled girl as if upon an inexorable judge, about to pronounce sentence upon her of life or death.</p>
			<p>Instinct, that keen sense of coming danger which Nature sometimes gives to her elect, had told her that, within the next few seconds, her doom would be sealed; that Fate would descend upon her, holding the sword of Nemesis; and it was Anne Mie’s tiny, half-shrivelled hand which had placed that sword into the grasp of Fate.</p>
			<p>“What is that paper? Will you let me see it, Anne Mie?” repeated Déroulède.</p>
			<p>“Citizen Merlin gave it to me just now,” began Anne Mie more quietly; “he seems very wroth at finding nothing compromising against you, Paul. They were a long time in the kitchen, and now they have gone to search my room and Pétronelle’s; but Merlin⁠—oh! that awful man!⁠—he seemed like a beast infuriated with his disappointment.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, yes.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t know what he hoped to get out of me, for I told him that you never spoke to your mother or to me about your political business, and that I was not in the habit of listening at the keyholes.”</p>
			<p>“Yes. And⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Then he began to speak of⁠—of our guest⁠—but, of course, there again I could tell him nothing. He seemed to be puzzled as to who had denounced you. He spoke about an anonymous denunciation, which reached the Public Prosecutor early this morning. It was written on a scrap of paper, and thrown into the public box, it seems, and⁠—”</p>
			<p>“It is indeed very strange,” said Déroulède, musing over this extraordinary occurrence, and still more over Anne Mie’s strange excitement in the telling of it. “I never knew I had a hidden enemy. I wonder if I shall ever find out⁠—”</p>
			<p>“That is just what I said to Citizen Merlin,” rejoined Anne Mie.</p>
			<p>“What?”</p>
			<p>“That I wondered if you, or⁠—or any of us who love you, will ever find out who your hidden enemy might be.”</p>
			<p>“It was a mistake to talk so fully with such a brute, little one.”</p>
			<p>“I didn’t say much, and I thought it wisest to humour him, as he seemed to wish to talk on that subject.”</p>
			<p>“Well? And what did he say?”</p>
			<p>“He laughed, and asked me if I would very much like to know.”</p>
			<p>“I hope you said No, Anne Mie?”</p>
			<p>“Indeed, indeed, I said Yes,” she retorted with sudden energy, her eyes fixed now upon Juliette, who still sat rigid and silent, watching every movement of Anne Mie from the moment in which she began to tell her story.</p>
			<p>“Would I not wish to know who is your enemy, Paul⁠—the creature who was base and treacherous enough to attempt to deliver you into the hands of those merciless villains? What wrong had you done to anyone?”</p>
			<p>“Sh! Hush, Anne Mie! you are too excited,” he said, smiling now, in spite of himself, at the young girl’s vehemence over what he thought was but a trifle⁠—the discovery of his own enemy.</p>
			<p>“I am sorry, Paul. How can I help being excited,” rejoined Anne Mie with quaint, pathetic gentleness, “when I speak of such base treachery, as that which Merlin has suggested?”</p>
			<p>“Well? And what did he suggest?”</p>
			<p>“He did more than suggest,” whispered Anne Mie almost inaudibly; “he gave me this paper⁠—the anonymous denunciation which reached the Public Prosecutor this morning⁠—he thought one of us might recognise the handwriting.”</p>
			<p>Then she paused, some five steps away from Déroulède, holding out towards him the crumpled paper, which up to now she had clutched determinedly in her hand. Déroulède was about to take it from her, and just before he had turned to do so, his eyes lighted on Juliette.</p>
			<p>She said nothing, she had merely risen instinctively, and had reached Anne Mie’s side in less than the fraction of a second.</p>
			<p>It was all a flash, and there was dead silence in the room, but in that one-hundredth part of a second, Déroulède had read guilt in the face of Juliette.</p>
			<p>It was nothing but instinct, a sudden, awful, unexplainable revelation. Her soul seemed suddenly to stand before him in all its misery and in all its sin.</p>
			<p>It was as if the fire from heaven had descended in one terrific crash, burying beneath its devastating flames his ideals, his happiness, and his divinity. She was no longer there. His madonna had ceased to be.</p>
			<p>There stood before him a beautiful woman, on whom he had lavished all the pent-up treasures of his love, whom he had succoured, sheltered, and protected, and who had repaid him thus.</p>
			<p>She had forced an entry into his house; she had spied upon him, dogged him, lied to him. The moment was too sudden, too awful for him to make even a wild guess at her motives. His entire life, his whole past, the present, and the future, were all blotted out in this awful dispersal of his most cherished dream. He had forgotten everything else save her appalling treachery; how could he even remember that once, long ago, in fair fight, he had killed her brother?</p>
			<p>She did not even try now to hide her guilt.</p>
			<p>A look of appeal, touching in its trustfulness, went out to him, begging him to spare her further shame. Perhaps she felt that love, such as his, could not be killed in a flash.</p>
			<p>His entire nature was full of pity, and to that pity she made a final appeal, lest she should be humiliated before Madame Déroulède and Anne Mie.</p>
			<p>And he, still under the spell of those magic moments when he had knelt at her feet, understood her prayer, and closing his eyes just for one brief moment in order to shut out forever that radiant vision of a pure angel whom he had worshipped, turned quietly to Anne Mie.</p>
			<p>“Give me that paper, Anne Mie,” he said coldly. “I may perhaps recognise the handwriting of my most bitter enemy.”</p>
			<p>“ ’Tis unnecessary now,” replied Anne Mie slowly, still gazing at the face of Juliette, in which she too had read what she wished to read.</p>
			<p>The paper dropped out of her hand.</p>
			<p>Déroulède stooped to pick it up. He unfolded it, smoothed it out, and then saw that it was blank.</p>
			<p>“There is nothing written on this paper,” he said mechanically.</p>
			<p>“No,” rejoined Anne Mie; “no other words save the story of her treachery.”</p>
			<p>“What you have done is evil and wicked, Anne Mie.”</p>
			<p>“Perhaps so; but I had guessed the truth, and I wished to know. God showed me this way, how to do it, and how to let you know as well.”</p>
			<p>“The less you speak of God just now, Anne Mie, the better, I think. Will you attend to maman? she seems faint and ill.”</p>
			<p>Madame Déroulède, silent and placid in her armchair, had watched the tragic scene before her, almost like a disinterested spectator. All her ideas and all her thoughts had been paralysed, since the moment when the first summons at the front door had warned her of the imminence of the peril to her son.</p>
			<p>The final discovery of Juliette’s treachery had left her impassive. Since her son was in danger, she cared little as to whence that danger had come.</p>
			<p>Obedient to Déroulède’s wish, Anne Mie was attending to the old lady’s comforts. The poor, crippled girl was already feeling the terrible reaction of her deed.</p>
			<p>In her childish mind she had planned this way, in which to bring the traitor to shame. Anne Mie knew nothing, cared nothing, about the motives which had actuated Juliette; all she knew was that a terrible Judas-like deed had been perpetrated against the man, on whom she herself had lavished her pathetic, hopeless love.</p>
			<p>All the pent-up jealousy which had tortured her for the past three weeks rose up, and goaded her into unmasking her rival.</p>
			<p>Never for a moment did she doubt Juliette’s guilt. The god of love may be blind, tradition has so decreed it, but the demon of jealousy has a hundred eyes, more keen than those of the lynx.</p>
			<p>Anne Mie, pushed aside by Merlin’s men when they forced their way into Déroulède’s study, had, nevertheless, followed them to the door. When the curtains were drawn aside and the room filled with light, she had seen Juliette enthroned, apparently calm and placid, upon the sofa.</p>
			<p>It was instinct, the instinct born of her own rejected passion, which caused her to read in the beautiful girl’s face all that lay hidden behind the pale, impassive mask. That same second sight made her understand Merlin’s hints and allusions. She caught every inflection of his voice, heard everything, saw everything.</p>
			<p>And in the midst of her anxiety and her terrors for the man she loved, there was the wild, primitive, intensely human joy at the thought of bringing that enthroned idol, who had stolen his love, down to earth at last.</p>
			<p>Anne Mie was not clever; she was simple and childish, with no complexity of passions or devious ways of intellect. It was her elemental jealousy which suggested the cunning plan for the unmasking of Juliette. She would make the girl cringe and fear, threaten her with discovery, and through her very terror shame her before Paul Déroulède.</p>
			<p>And now it was all done; it had all occurred as she had planned it. Paul knew that his love had been wasted upon a liar and a traitor, and Juliette stood pale, humiliated, a veritable wreck of shamed humanity.</p>
			<p>Anne Mie had triumphed, and was profoundly, abjectly wretched in her triumph. Great sobs seemed to tear at her very heartstrings. She had pulled down Paul’s idol from her pedestal, but the one look she had cast at his face had shown her that she had also wrecked his life.</p>
			<p>He seemed almost old now. The earnest, restless gaze had gone from his eyes; he was staring mutely before him, twisting between nerveless fingers that blank scrap of paper, which had been the means of annihilating his dream.</p>
			<p>All energy of attitude, all strength of bearing, which were his chief characteristics, seemed to have gone. There was a look of complete blankness, of hopelessness in his listless gesture.</p>
			<p>“How he loved her!” sighed Anne Mie, as she tenderly wrapped the shawl round Madame Déroulède’s shoulders.</p>
			<p>Juliette had said nothing; it seemed as if her very life had gone out of her. She was a mere statue now, her mind numb, her heart dead, her very existence a fragile piece of mechanism. But she was looking at Déroulède. That one sense in her had remained alive: her sight.</p>
			<p>She looked and looked: and saw every passing sign of mental agony on his face: the look of recognition of her guilt, the bewilderment at the appalling crash, and now that hideous deathlike emptiness of his soul and mind.</p>
			<p>Never once did she detect horror or loathing. He had tried to save her from being further humiliated before his mother, but there was no hatred or contempt in his eyes, when he realised that she had been unmasked by a trick.</p>
			<p>She looked and looked, for there was no hope in her, not even despair. There was nothing in her mind, nothing in her soul, but a great pall-like blank.</p>
			<p>Then gradually, as the minutes sped on, she saw the strong soul within him make a sudden fight against the darkness of his despair: the movement of the fingers became less listless; the powerful, energetic figure straightened itself out; remembrance of other matters, other interests than his own began to lift the overwhelming burden of his grief.</p>
			<p>He remembered the letter-case containing the compromising papers. A vague wonder arose in him as to Juliette’s motives in warding off, through her concealment of it, the inevitable moment of its discovery by Merlin.</p>
			<p>The thought that her entire being had undergone a change, and that she now wished to save him, never once entered his mind; if it had, he would have dismissed it as the outcome of maudlin sentimentality, the conceit of the fop, who believes his personality to be irresistible.</p>
			<p>His own self-torturing humility pointed but to the one conclusion: that she had fooled him all along; fooled him when she sought his protection; fooled him when she taught him to love her; fooled him, above all, at the moment when, subjugated by the intensity of his passion, he had for one brief second ceased to worship in order to love.</p>
			<p>When the bitter remembrance of that moment of sweetest folly rushed back to his aching brain, then at last did he look up at her with one final, agonised look of reproach, so great, so tender, and yet so final, that Anne Mie, who saw it, felt as if her own heart would break with the pity of it all.</p>
			<p>But Juliette had caught the look too. The tension of her nerves seemed suddenly to relax. Memory rushed back upon her with tumultuous intensity. Very gradually her knees gave beneath her, and at last she knelt down on the floor before him, her golden head bent under the burden of her guilt and her shame.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
